Self-awareness and its improvement are essential to living a happier, healthier life. Self-awareness means that you can see yourself clearly, and understand your role in any situation.

Self-aware individuals are also more creative, confident, smarter in their decisions and have stronger relationships. You don’t have to worry if the idea of self-awareness still sounds vague. We offer eight examples which will guide you on your journey.

Self-Awareness Examples
You can learn more about self-awareness by looking at these eight examples.

1. Embrace a growth mindset
It’s normal to have our own ways. It’s natural to be set in our ways, especially if you have been doing something for many years. When you adopt a growth-mindset, you realize that your basic abilities can grow and change if you are open to it.

2. Set boundaries
It’s difficult to be objective and think clearly when we don’t have boundaries. It’s because long work hours, time spent with people who drain us or scrolling through our phones all day make it difficult to reflect and be aware of your thoughts and actions.

3. Recognize destructive habits
Some habits can be very destructive. For example, staying up late to binge watch a TV show instead of sleeping or drinking wine after work every day rather than exercising.

You should be on the lookout for habits that can be more destructive than others. Scrolling through our phones in the few minutes we have to ourselves can prevent us from doing important things like thinking or reflecting. It can also be harmful to assume that someone is wrong when they criticize us. Sometimes, the feedback of others is very important.

4. Blind spots: how to identify them
We cannot all be experts at everything. Self-awareness is important because if we could do everything, then the world would become less interesting. Understanding and improving your blind spots are two ways to increase self-awareness. Blind spots can include never asking for help, believing you are always right or avoiding difficult conversations. You can improve these habits or, at least, admit them to yourself when in a difficult situation if you recognize them.

5. Improve your ability to anticipate things and create an action plan
Self-awareness is important. When we are aware of a situation that could tempt us into giving in to our weakness, we make a plan. You may be a person who deals with “Sunday Scaries”, and that you cope by watching a show on TV. This only makes you feel worse. Making a plan for bettering yourself is part of self-awareness. Why not take yourself to the movies or have a date on Sunday?

6. Attention!
In our world of distractions, it’s not always easy to pay attention. Put your phone down, practice active listening and limit distractions in your daily life.

7. Ask the right questions
It takes courage to ask a question. Asking the correctquestions takes courage, self-awareness, and thought. Imagine, for example, that your boss has given you negative feedback. Ask yourself if it feels legitimate. Ask yourself what you could do differently the next time if you believe it’s true. We are all flawed, so it’s important to recognize when you make a mistake and ask yourself and others how you could do things better next time.

8. Self-awareness is a good thing to help others achieve
Self-awareness doesn’t only concern ourselves. It’s important to be aware of your own self. Asking “Why do think you feel this way?” is a great question. Asking a friend to explain their feelings in an open and caring way is a good question.
